[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Compton
Rom is with us again
to talk about the
life-giving force of micros
in the human body.
In this conversation,
we're going
to pick up where we left
off in the last conversation
and see what he's been up
to since we last spoke.
And I can say this.
It's really exciting.
I was so happy to be
talking to you on the phone
to prep for this.
I thought, oh my god.
You're on to something.
This is big.
Because we just tend to think
of them as creepy little
critters that we're in
battle with on some level.
And that's not your world view.
So just to maybe encapsulate the
last conversation a little bit
and what you
brought to the table
there before we launch into
this one, that'd be great.
>>COMPTON ROM: Well, Regina,
the last conversation,
we talked about the
importance of the microbiome
and probiotics in the body.
And this happened a few
years ago before the crazes
with probiotics and kombucha.
And now, one of the
biggest things in medicine
is microbiome therapeutics
and whether treating people
with new types of microbes
to combat disease.
And my feeling was
that back then, I
knew that the longest
living people in the world
usually had the
healthiest microbes.
And fecal matter transplants
were just getting started.
And you transfer microbes from
healthy people to sick people,
and the sick people get healthy.
And you transfer
microbes from sick people
and you give them
to healthy people,
and the healthy people get sick.
>>REGINA: Did they actually
do that in reverse in studies?
Has it ever been done?
Where you would take
unhealthy fecal matter
and put into a healthy person?
>>ROM: No, but
you have kids that
are proven to go into McDonald's
in like the plastic balls,
and they get sick
because they're basically
eating the fecal matter on
these balls from other children.
And so you can just kind of
imagine what that's like.
>>REGINA: So in
theory, obviously, yes.
>>ROM: Yeah, so I went
in search with the fact
that if healthy people have
the healthiest microbiomes,
I'm going to look for the
healthiest people in the world.
And so for the last
six years, we've
been on a worldwide quest to
visit all the longevity zones
in the world--
what are called blue zones by
Dan Buettner and cold spots,
where there's low
incidence of disease--
for example Copper
Canyon in Mexico,
where they absolutely have a
very low incidence of diabetes
in Northern India in the Punjab.
>>REGINA: Punjab, yes.
>>ROM: Where they have very
low incidence of Alzheimer's
and very low incidence
of Parkinson's there.
>>REGINA: Which is
interesting-- in Punjab,
we were just talking in another
conversation about rice,
and grains, and everything in
Alzheimer's-- and Punjab is one
of the biggest producers
of rice in the world,
but that's obviously not it.
>>ROM: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah, interesting.
Go ahead.
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: So you were telling
us some of the other zones
before I interrupted.
>>ROM: Well, there's a
zone in Costa Rica, Nosara,
but I've been focusing
on this zone in Greece
in an island called Ikaria.
And we've been working
with an organic winery
there, Afianes
Winery, and working
with the resident
microbiologist,
and he's a professor emeritus
at the University of Athens.
And he's also looking
at the microbiome,
and he found some
very unique microbes
on the grapes in Greece, and
specifically on that island
that gives people the ability
to basically live a long life.
And over 30% of the population
are over 90 years old and--
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>ROM: Yeah, and when you're
talking to these people,
they don't even talk
about their age.
So their mindset is
not even about aging.
It's not longevity.
And they don't have access to
these supplements that we have.
They don't have
access to Whole Foods.
They don't have access to GNC.
They're just living their lives.
And they're drinking the
right kinds of water--
>>REGINA: Do they drink
wine by and large?
I mean, is that
a part of their--
>>ROM: They drink a lot of
wine, yeah, like, every week.
>>REGINA: How many
glasses a day average?
Because you know there's
been a lot on the news
lately about what is
considered binge drinking,
because our binge drinking
numbers in the US are going up.
>>ROM: They are, yeah.
You know, I couldn't tell
you how many glasses of wine
they drink.
But interestingly
enough is, they don't
focus on how the wine tastes.
They just like drinking wine.
And some of the wines that
they drink is very vinegary.
>>REGINA: Yeah, well,
this comes into the story.
>>ROM: That's right.
So we started
looking, and I started
talking to this microbiologist.
And we started noticing that
perhaps it isn't just the food
that they're eating.
It may be the microbes are
having some sort of effect.
And sure enough, we started
doing microbiome studies
on people on this island and
especially the older people.
Their microbiomes are vastly
different from the people that
had lived on the island that
have left the islands that are
living in Athens, for example.
So they have a--
by DNA analysis,
their microbiomes
are vastly different because
the foods they're eating
are different.
But when they came back on the
island to eat the same foods,
and to drink the same wines,
and to drink the same vinegars
on their food, their microbiomes
changed-- the younger people.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ROM: And presumably,
their health status
would change as well.
So we started on this quest to
say, look, maybe it's not just
the food, and maybe it's
not just the supplements,
and maybe it's not just the
lifestyle that they're eating--
that maybe the microbes have a
stake in the body's whole being
and whole wellness.
And maybe it's not
just the microbes.
It's the way that
they're processing
the foods inside their body.
So our labs in Utah,
we've been discovering
like a whole new
class of compounds.
And these compounds allow
the body to make metabolites
like vitamins--
like lipopolysaccharides,
like single proteins
that allow the body to
basically face life and face
all of its challenges
head on, you know?
One thing I've noticed about
Western medicine as it is now
is we're very reactive.
too are diseases.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ROM: We don't do anything
until the disease happens,
and we become reactive.
So we get atherosclerosis,
let's do something about it.
We get diabetes, now let's
do something about it.
And so we're reactive.
But in our lifestyles, in
our athletes, in our studies,
we're very proactive.
The best football
teams, for example,
are the offensive machines.
They're the ones that go
out there and assemble
the best minds and the
best assets to go out
and score a bunch
of points, right?
And in our military,
obviously, we
arm soldiers with the best
tools and the best assets
to go out and, unfortunately,
annihilate the enemy
with overwhelming force.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ROM: Why don't we do
that with our bodies?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ROM: Right?
So why don't we
amass these tools
and give the microbes
the things that we
need to allow them
to amass our bodies
with overwhelming healthy assets
to live a healthy lifestyle?
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And instead, what
we're seeing right now
is going to a dinner party
or putting on a dinner party
now for a variety of people.
The first question comes up is,
so what are you allergic to?
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: And here, you have
one person can't eat this.
Another person can't eat gluten.
Another person can't eat fats.
It's really shocking when you
think of even 10 years ago,
you'd go and you'd kind
of get along and maybe
one person there couldn't
digest something.
Now, it seems as
almost everybody
has some kind of allergic
reaction to normal foods.
>>ROM: Yes.
And I can tell you that
it's part physiological.
And a lot of it is mindset.
And I believe a lot
of it is emotional.
And just because we have
permission now to be allergic--
before, I wasn't
allergic to gluten.
And oh, I can be
allergic to gluten now?
Great!
I'm gluten intolerant.
So I'll make that--
>>REGINA: Which
also can be masking
all kinds of stuff
going on in the guts
in a dysfunctional manner.
>>ROM: Exactly.
So yes, there is that emotional,
psychological mindset,
but there is actually a
physiological component.
And a lot of it
is because we may
lack the genetic
predisposition to make
the proper human enzymes
to break down these things.
But a lot of it is, we don't
have the proper microbes
in our body to make the
proper enzymes to break down
the foodstuffs that
we're allergic to.
>>REGINA: And the microbes
are simply a function
of diet for the most part?
>>ROM: For the most part, it's
a function of our environment,
right?
When we talk about diet,
we talk about nutrition.
And when I talk
about nutrition, I'm
talking nutrition on the
most basic levels, you know?
Because I'm a
microbiologist, I believe
that the microbes--
that the human body
is actually an extension
of the microbial life
and the microbial body.
We're just their extension.
They've been here for
millions of years.
We've only been here for
a fraction of that time,
and they're using us as
their stage to live a million
more years.
And they're actually
very intelligent.
And if we recognize
that fact that we have--
how many cells does
the human body have?
Like over 100 trillion?
And it's proven now that
90% of that 100 trillion
are microbes, and only
10% are human cells.
And the majority of those
microbes live in our gut.
And they're all like
little computers.
And they want this body to live.
They have a stake.
They're the biggest
stakeholder in our body.
We are not.
Aetna and our health plans are
not the biggest stakeholders.
>>REGINA: So are we their
host or are they our host?
>>ROM: Right.
We are their host.
If you think that
way, then you'll
start to create a paradigm
shift in your body.
So I've come up
with this new way
of thinking about the
microbes in our gut, which
we call our gastrointestinal
tract or our GI tract.
And frequently when
we relabel things,
we tend to subconsciously think
differently about those things.
Well, I would like to
think as the microbes
as our little
computers in our gut.
And they're the ones
making all of our vitamins.
The only reason why we have
to take b-12 exogenously
is because we don't
make enough in our gut.
But there's a lot of microbes
that make b-12 in our gut.
If we packed more of these
microbes that made b-12,
we don't have to take b-12.
And you can be vegan, and
plant-based all you want.
You just have to have
the proper microbes.
You just need to arm them.
Because they have
the intelligence,
and they have the will to make
our lives a limitless life.
So these are intelligent little
computers living in our gut,
and you can sense that our gut
is like one big condominium
complex of like 90
trillion organisms.
And they're like
biological computers,
and they have an
intelligence behind them.
In fact, our gut is
called our second brain.
So if we have like a
mental intelligence,
we have emotional intelligence,
and great athletes
have what's called kinesthetic
intelligence-- you know,
like Michael Jordan has amazing
kinesthetic intelligence.
And now with our iPhones,
and our computers
with Google and the Cloud, we
have artificial intelligence.
So we have the AI.
We have knowledge intelligence.
We have emotional intelligence.
We even have heart intelligence.
But no one ever talks about
biological intelligence--
the intelligence that's housed
in our gut, our second brain.
I think it balances out all the
other intelligence, especially
the AI-- the technological
intelligence.
You know, the more I see my
child playing with my phone--
she's only 2 and 1/2 years old.
She already knows
how to use the mouse,
and she hardly knows how to
use her little iPad to transfer
some of her brain function.
It's like astounding to me.
So we're trying to take
this away from her,
but we need to balance it out.
We need to balance out the
technological information
and our dependence on
artificial intelligence
with biological intelligence.
Because this is native,
wild-crafted intelligence
that's coming from the earth.
>>REGINA: And it's interesting
because your background--
you're one of these
people that is--
I think you have an
unusually high form
of broad-based
intelligence, shall we say?
Whenever anybody that
knows you speaks of you,
you're exemplary in your
ability to grok concepts
across the board--
technologically, biologically,
and everything in between.
And part of your
background was in--
as an architect, even
in the very early days
of Google, and starting
to create these systems
of artificial intelligence.
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: So you know of what
you speak when you say this.
It's interesting you should
say, when it comes down to it,
we're trying to get that device
away from our little daughter,
so she retains her organic,
native intelligence.
>>ROM: Exactly.
So I'm all for
wild crafting back
into nature and through our
biological intelligence.
So I'm up for nominating
to changing the GI
tract into our BI tract--
our biological
intelligence tract.
>>REGINA: I love it!
Well, let's start on the
components of this story,
because we're going to
start with something--
fermentation.
We think of fermentation
like wine and beer,
but it's also the sugars
in our body, et cetera.
So let's talk about
fermentation then
roll right into the story
of super fermentation.
>>ROM: Right.
So every time we eat food,
we, as a human body--
we don't actually eat the food.
The first thing that eats it
are the microbes in our body.
We eat the
fermentation products.
We actually eat
the waste products
from 10 layers of microbes
that are in our gut.
In fact, the human gut is
so populated with living
organisms, it is the most
populated place on Earth
with living organisms.
There's nothing more
populated than the human gut.
>>REGINA: And so when we poo,
what's going out of our body?
>>ROM: When we poo, what's
going out of our body
is the actual waste products
that the body doesn't
need plus a lot of microbes.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ROM: So our bodies has
extracted all the waste
products.
So once we get food
into our stomach
and it enters the beginning
parts of our small intestine,
where there's a
lot of oxygen, it
gets broken down
by those bacteria
in what's called the
proximal small intestine.
And then when they break it
down into primary metabolites,
basically, their waste
product, then there's
a second set of microbes that
take it and break it down
into metabolites.
And these metabolites get
sifted out of the intestine
into our body.
That's what we eat for food.
So we're eating
primary metabolites,
secondary metabolites,
tertiary metabolites,
quaternary metabolites.
And as this food
goes through our gut,
we're finding out that
it's being fermented
in like this cascading
super fermentation, where
all kinds of microbes are
going at it sequentially,
in parallel, they're just
going at it at one time.
And they're eating
the actual food.
They're eating the byproducts of
the microbes that have already
eaten that food.
And they're changing
these components
into recognizable
metabolites that we
can measure in our urine,
we can measure in our blood.
Right now, these
metabolites, for example,
are small-chain fatty acids--
are probably the most popular
metabolites that science
is recognizing right now--
SCFA-- small-chain fatty acids.
The most recognizable
are three--
butyric acid, propionic
acid, and acetic acid.
But there are smaller ones
called oxaloacetic acid,
pyruvate, and malic acid.
And they make up the
acids that are actually
the food for the main
bacteria in our body
that provides fuel for
every single cell called
the mitochondria.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ROM: So I called the
mitochondria the main bacteria.
Most people don't think
of it as a bacteria,
but believe it or not,
it's got evolutionary genes
that make it into-- it's
literally a bacteria.
>>REGINA: OK, so
I have to back up.
I have a question.
So I'm listening to
what you're saying here.
So by the time it's ready to
be eliminated from the body,
it sounds like a lot of
the metabolite function
has already happened.
The various microbes and such
have been utilized and fed us
in certain ways.
Wouldn't that mean that the
final product that leaves us
somewhat diminished
and yet that is
what's used in the fecal
transplants, for example.
What's left in that that is
useful to be used to help
increase the health of others.
>>ROM: There's a lot left.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ROM: Yeah, I would say--
I can't-- I haven't done
this scientifically,
but I would be surprised if
the fecal matter was not--
if the fecal matter had maybe
even 70% of the nutrients
that came that started
at the beginning.
There's a lot left.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ROM: We're probably like
one of the few species that
don't eat fecal matter.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's true.
I've seen my dogs do it.
>>ROM: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: It's like ew.
>>ROM: Mother deer--
the first time
that they get their babies,
the first thing that they do
is they feed fecal
matter to their babies.
That's why deer only
have like two progeny,
because they don't have
enough fecal matter
to feed three or four.
The third one that comes
out, they usually die.
All the rabbits, and Guinea
pigs, and things like that--
they feed their
young fecal matter.
So it's very nutritious.
We give it to our plants.
It's very nutritious.
>>REGINA: Biodynamic,
biointensive gardening
relies on it.
>>ROM: So fecal
matter is something
that doesn't smell good
to us, so we naturally
like stay away from it, but
it's actually very nutritious.
>>REGINA: OK, so now going
into super fermentation,
and what are the effects
of this in the body?
>>ROM: Well, the effects
of super fermentation
is, our body gets to get these
compounds that are heretofore
been identified.
So there are literally hundreds
and thousands of compounds
that these bacteria make.
Like, there are immune factors
that bacteria make from food.
They're called bacteriocins.
It's well known that--
for example, like
lactobacillus, plantarum,
and a lot of the lactobacilli
make these antimicrobials.
They make bacterocins.
They make fungicins.
They actually fight
off other bacteria
with these small-chain
polypeptides
called bacteriocins.
And you can use them
as antibiotics, right?
But they don't.
Most of the antibiotics
actually come from microbes.
They come from fungi--
Aspergillus niger.
So that's being
produced in our body.
And so for immunity,
there's things that
are produced for inflammation.
They keep the inflammation down.
They change our
glucose metabolism.
And when you feed the
microbes a lot of oxygen--
dissolved oxygen, like
in hyperbaric chambers
or high oxygenated
water, and you
feed them the right
foods, all of a sudden,
you're getting a shift of these
microbes in the microbiota
that we're finding.
And this shift improves
your glucose metabolism.
And believe it or
not, some people
are saying that it
prevents the cancer cells
from being able to stop growing
in the presence of oxygen,
because it stops what's called
glycolysis and increases
oxidative phosphorylation.
So these compounds are
what I'm calling like--
these limitless compounds that
makes us live our limitless
lifestyle.
And we don't focus on preparing
and nutrifying and getting
our body to amass as many
of these offensive assets
as possible.
And this is what I call a
proactive wellness model.
>>REGINA: So
besides the vinegar,
which a lot of
people have heard--
the whole process of
drinking apple cider
vinegar first thing
in the morning.
And kombucha is really
popular in every flavor
imaginable-- you know,
honey lavender and so forth.
What are some of the
other foods that we
can consume that are really
strong on short-chain fatty
acids?
>>ROM: Well, it's not just
short-chain fatty acid.
That's just one class of things.
But like butyric acid
is very important.
And it's called butyric
acid because it kind of
smells like butter.
And when you drink
like certain wines that
have a buttery taste,
that's butyric acid.
But you get that
from a lot of plants.
If you have a high
plant-based diet--
the reason why people
on plant-based diets
are not very obese
is because they're
producing a lot of
butyric acid, and they're
finding that butyric acid has
a very good direct correlation
in being able to
prevent obesity.
And it's produced in the
part of our intestine
where there's no
oxygen. It's produced
by the obligate
anaerobe bacteria.
So what we've been
doing is, in our lab,
we've been replicating this
super fermentation model, where
we're fermenting foods with
bacteria that replicate
the human gut, the colon,
and we're literally creating
these limitless metabolites.
And these metabolites
are solely there
to optimize our longevity.
So I'm calling them longevicans.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's the term
you've given them,
which we're going to probably
hear more about in the future.
But you just said something.
Among those various
metabolites, I
think you also said
that it was pyruvate--
>>ROM: Yes, malic acid.
>>REGINA: You know, it's
just occurring to me--
OK, I think we even talked
about this on the phone.
I did a series on cancer, and
Dr. Ko, Korean-American woman,
was using this interesting
protocol using bromopyruvate-3.
>>ROM: 3-bromopyruvate.
>>REGINA: 3-bromopyruvate
to dump lactic acid
from the cells.
And that die off would not allow
cancer to continue growing.
And so this feeding right
back into the same story
you're talking about.
>>ROM: Well, I can't--
>>REGINA: I mean partially, in
a sense, it's the same players.
>>ROM: Yes, It's the
same class of family,
except 3-bromopyruvate
is a synthetic compound.
It's not produced
naturally by the body.
There's another compound called
DCA, dichloroacetic acid.
It's got two chlorine molecules
on top of an acidic acid,
and scientists at the University
of Edmonton back in 2007
said, hey, this stops certain
forms of cancer and things
like that.
But it's not a compound
that's made naturally
by the human body,
but it's related.
They're literally
short-chain fatty acids.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
That's what I was saying.
Yeah, interesting.
>>ROM: So I'm saying
is that the body has
a natural intelligence.
The microbes have a natural,
biological intelligence
that they can make
their own products.
We don't need to
make it for them.
>>REGINA: We don't
need the synthetic.
>>ROM: We don't
need the synthetics
if we do our jobs right.
Right now we do,
because we don't know
which products are being made.
What we need is the proper
nutrition, the proper mindset,
and the proper microbes--
just those three things.
And when I say nutrition,
you need to have--
you have to have
enough oxygen, you
have to have the
right kind of water,
and you have to have
the right kind of food.
Because if you don't have
the right kind of food,
it doesn't convert
into these longevicans.
You know, you eat a processed
food, for example, that's
high and fat, that's high in a
carbohydrate, that's not easily
broken down, or a
carbohydrate that's
amended by some sort of
genetic modification,
and the body doesn't know
what to do with that.
It doesn't make the
right kind of longevican
in order to go into the
body to stop inflammation,
to increase our immunity,
to regulate our hormones
and glucose--
things like that.
>>REGINA: But
preceding all of that,
you mentioned-- and that is
the mind, because of the now
generation-long brainwashing
that the human body has
no capability of
recovering itself.
You must go to someone
in a white coat who
can do something to you,
or at you, or whatever,
in order to recover.
And this is why I think it's so
important that people like you
speak and say, no, no, no, no.
It's there.
It's all there.
It's all packaged
inside you, but you
have to basically
create a platform for it
to express itself.
>>ROM: Exactly.
Our belief system
changes everything.
It's not just an
epigenetic change.
It's more than an
I mean it's a change of will.
And it's a change of like
getting your power back.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ROM: If I can do anything--
is I want to tell people
to get your power back.
Don't give your power away to
external forces that tell you
what to think and how to think.
I mean, we've got like
an external brain now.
It's called Google.
>>REGINA: Yeah, thanks
to you and others.
So yes--
>>ROM: But now, we have our-- we
have the second internal brain.
We have a biological,
intelligent brain in our guts.
And we can't really
converse with it.
We can't really talk to it.
But just like computers
need software,
these biological
computers, these microbes,
they need "wetware."
So the products that we create
in our lab, I consider wetware.
I consider they're
informational signal proteins
that we're getting from
these super fermentations.
Like you take like one
drop of this probiotic
that we make call
ProAlive, and some people
experience like
an enormous shift.
And it's information.
You can sense the
information and the wetware
going into these
biological computers.
And all of a sudden, boom.
They turn on.
And what do you need for
a computer to turn on?
You need electricity.
You need power.
You need the right
kind of hardware.
And you need the software.
Same thing with
our microbes-- you
know you need the nutrition.
You need the oxygen. And
you need the microbes--
so you need the right
kind of equipment--
but then you need to arm
them with the information.
>>REGINA: Now we get to what I
find the really exciting part,
because you're starting to
culture these microbiomes
from the small intestines,
and this can actually
be utilized to help
determine a person's health
profile on the deepest
level of their functioning.
And OK, so just
take off and tell us
what's going on in
that part of the story.
>>ROM: Well, first
off, I'm working
with these physicians that focus
on the gut and the microbiome,
and they're called
Mayr physicians.
And it's spelled M-A-Y-R.
It's based on this Austrian
physician by the
name of FX Mayr,
and he tried to help people from
the point of view of their gut.
So he looks at the
health from the points
of view of their gut.
And most of these
doctors are in Europe.
And they're based in Austria.
And my wife and I
go to this clinic
there to have them
look at our guts
and see what our body is like,
just from looking at your gut.
So some doctors
look at your tongue.
Some doctors look at your eyes.
And other doctors, they
can look at your hands
and see what your
health status is.
These people look at your gut.
And they're amazing doctors.
And they're an
international association
of physicians that are
really focused on the gut
health, and the
microbiome health,
and what things are being
produced in the microbiome.
And from there, I had met
through my internet technology
conventions--
I was I was speaking at a
convention called the Web
Summit last year, and I
met these young doctors
out of Luxembourg
that were making
machine that can actually
grow the human microbiome
in a machine.
It's like, wow, who
would have thunk it?
But these guys are
very brilliant.
And they're able to divide
up the human gut into five
sections, and
they're able to grow
the actual human microbiome
to a 92% fidelity rate, which
is astounding.
Up until now, no
lab in the world
has been able to grow
the human microbiome up
past 60% based on DNA analysis.
So you take fecal matter,
you just do all the DNA,
and you go, OK, so
there's 1,000 species
of microbes in your gut.
And then when they
actually grow it out,
they can only grow out 600.
So that 60%.
Well, these guys can grow
920 species of microbes.
>>REGINA: So once that's done,
once they have been cultured,
then what happens?
>>ROM: Well, they claimed
I haven't had access
to the machine.
So they're doing all the work on
their end with their physicians
and their work.
So what they're claiming is
that this machine can actually
segment out the microbes
in five parts of the colon.
And when they
segment it out, you
have a family of
microbes growing
in the distal small intestine.
You have another family
growing in the proximal small
intestine, and one in
the large intestine,
and one in the colon.
And they're all really happy.
And then you give
them supplements.
You can actually give them
vitamin C, for example,
and in every single section.
And then you can see what
the effect is on that--
on your personal microbiome.
They say, are you good
with this vitamin C,
or are you bad with
this vitamin C?
So let's get you like
this generic vitamin
C in capsules versus, let's get
you this liposomal vitamin C.
They can go to that
degree and see--
>>REGINA: Which is
highly absorbable.
>>ROM: Which is
And let's see what
effect that has
on the species of
microbes that grow up.
>>REGINA: And it could be
that in one part of the colon,
it doesn't work, and in another
part, it works beautifully?
And can the effect on
these different segments
compete with each
other in its effect?
>>ROM: It could be, but this
is where our work comes in
because we do like the
super fermentation.
So we have a model where we
would take the human microbiota
and mix them all together in a
simulated super fermentation.
And the end result is, they can
do a functional metabolic test.
Say like whatever is in
the human microbiome,
they can scoop out
some liquid, and they
can start to do a gas
chromatograph on it
and see exactly what
metabolites are being made.
So are these metabolites
inflammatory metabolites?
Meaning that is your body
rejecting it because you're
going into inflammation?
Or are they low
inflammatory metabolites?
Is your body actually
healing from this supplement?
>>REGINA: So right now,
that's the direct application
they can use-- is just subjected
to these various substances?
>>ROM: That's right.
That's right.
So let's take
turmeric for example,
because most people think,
well, that's good for everybody
always.
>>REGINA: Right, right, right.
And they've played
with that a little bit?
>>ROM: I don't know if
they've played with turmeric,
we've played with turmeric--
not with their machine,
but with our super
fermentation technology,
we've played with turmeric.
So the different ways that
we've played with turmeric
is, we're looking at turmeric
just as the plant itself,
and they're saying that it's
not bioavailable, and it's true.
It doesn't get absorbed
very readily unless you
add like black pepper.
But we're finding that if
you actually take turmeric
and you ferment it down via
these different segments
of the gut, and we simulate
these fermentations
through super fermentation,
it's highly absorbable.
>>REGINA: But how would
that be applicable
back to the human being
after this process?
>>ROM: OK, so after this
process, these cucerminoids
that's being absorbed,
it's being put out
into these different,
what we call longevicans.
So we're finding
out that there's
certain flavonoids
that are coming out
and certain other compounds
that's very anti-inflammatory to
the brain, for example, right?
So we have yet to characterize
these different sets
of compounds.
But showing up on a
gas chromatograph,
these compounds are
still uncharacterized,
but there are certain
compounds that come out
after the microbes
get done fermenting
the turmeric in the body
that science has not yet
characterized.
And the reason why they
haven't characterized
it is because they have no--
they had no way of having
a reaction chamber to find out
what might these compounds are.
>>REGINA: So this is a
whole new area of research?
>>ROM: A whole new area,
a whole new platform,
a whole new family
of compounds that
are being produced
every day in our gut
that we haven't discovered yet.
>>REGINA: OK,
let's for a moment,
and tell me-- if I may be
totally mistaken on this
but say going back to
the population in Greece
that you're working with
on that particular island
aren't flavonoids present
in wine, or wine making,
or the process of wine?
Do flavonoids come into that?
>>ROM: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and
so if you're talking
about this incredible
mental stability and health
no less 30% of a population
over 130 over 90.
So this is, again,
flavonoids coming in
but from a consumer angle.
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: Yeah, interesting.
>>ROM: So they're drinking
this stuff it's already
fermented the thing
that we got from there
is that they pre-ferment it by
putting it in the wine cask,
right?
So you're fermenting
it outside the body.
So when you take it inside the
body, the microbes are going,
great.
Our job is done for us.
So they can ferment
it even more,
or they can just pass it along.
So by fermenting things outside
and doing super fermentation
outside the body when you
take it inside the body,
it makes it easier for your
body to just process it
through and give it to
the cells that we need.
So these people are getting--
they eat a lot of fermented
food on this island and Ikaria,
they drink a lot of
fermented drinks.
They make their own wine.
Most of these families,
they make their own wines,
and they make
their own vinegars.
And they're drinking
it all the time.
>>REGINA: And so
when we're looking
at all these kind of
popular studies on wine,
and, oh, take your resveratrol.
It's reduced down to a
powder form and all that.
They might be looking
in the wrong direction?
Or is that part of it?
>>ROM: That's part of it.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ROM: Yeah, like again, so
we need the proper nutrients.
We need the proper microbes.
And we need the proper mindset.
So without the nutrients,
then the microbes can't work.
But if you don't have
the proper microbes, then
no matter how much nutrient
and mindset you have,
it's not going to work, either.
>>REGINA: Well,
since so many people
you know do enjoy a glass
of wine here and there,
and listening to this,
just like the coffee
drinkers like that
part of the story, what
about the overall impact if
you're looking at it as a mind,
body, spirit experience.
When you're looking at
wine now, looking at it
from the guts point of
view all the way up to,
ooo, it's a nice,
little buzz experience.
How do you perceive that?
>>ROM: Well, you look at the
beneficial compounds in wine,
right?
And I can tell you that
alcohol ethanol may give you
a nice feeling, but it's not
really a beneficial compound.
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm getting to.
Yeah.
>>ROM: So it's the vinegar.
You know that wine is
basically half the pathway
for the complete
fermentation of a grape?
>>REGINA: Half?
>>ROM: Half, yeah.
>>REGINA: Where does it
go if it goes all the way?
>>ROM: It goes to vinegar.
>>REGINA: Vinegar?
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: You're drinking
while the ethanol's high
and the vinegar part is low?
>>ROM: That's exactly right.
What they do is,
the winemakers--
>>REGINA: They truncate it.
>>ROM: Once the ethanol gets at
its highest peak, they stop it,
you know?
They put sulfites in there.
They actually kill the bacteria.
>>REGINA: Not with like the
homemade stuff in Greece?
>>ROM: No, not like the--
>>REGINA: We're just
slipping over into vinegar.
So you get a buzz, but
you're also getting
the benefits of vinegar.
>>ROM: Well, they just take
it out, and they drink it.
They're making wine
like every day.
So they're saying like, we
made this two weeks ago,
so therefore the ethanol
content is this high,
so we're going to
drink this now.
Or they just let it--
they have like this
huge tub, and when
the wine isn't so
good to drink, they'll
make their version of balsamic
vinegar in this huge tub,
and it's amazing stuff.
And then, they put it on their
salads and things like that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
just wanted to go down
that track for a little bit for
people who are thinking, hey!
>>ROM: So the thing
is this is like,
the drinkable vinegars that
you see in Whole Foods--
there are like
drinkable vinegars now.
They're much better
for you than wine
because it's the
acetic acids that
are really healthy for you--
but not that healthy.
I mean, if you can
drink like liquids
that are high in malic
acid, and butyric acid,
and propionic acid,
that's even better for you
than acetic acid.
Acetic acid actually makes
you fat, believe it or not.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>ROM: Yeah, so it's been
more associated with obesity
than butyric or propionic acid.
>>REGINA: OK, this is the
time to get into the acid part
of the story.
A lot of people
listening to this
probably have their
Kangen Water machines
and are drinking 9.5, 10,
on a scale of alkalinity,
water on a daily basis and
maybe even exclusively.
Now you're just
talking about acids
and the role of these acids.
And we just heard
you also say there
are beneficial and
not-as-beneficial acids.
So please launch into
the story of alkalinity
and the human body,
including enforced alkalinity
through these waters.
>>ROM: Right, OK, so--
>>REGINA: It's a
controversial topic, I know.
>>ROM: I realize that there's
a lot of people that's
going to be very disappointed.
>>REGINA: I have a
machine, too, by the way.
>>ROM: I do, too.
>>REGINA: So let's go for it.
>>ROM: OK, the human body
is an adaptive mechanism.
It's an adaptive machine.
So we undergo
homeostasis, meaning
that if we're too far
one way, the body's
going to do whatever it takes
to get back into alignment.
So our body is meant to
have like a neutral pH--
like a 7.2.
And if you bring it to
like a very alkaline pH,
like over 8.1, it's
going to do whatever
it takes to get back into
normality, which is 7.2 to 7.6.
>>REGINA: So what will the body
do to struggle to right itself?
>>ROM: It'll take calcium away
from the body in the long term,
being too alkaline.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ROM: So the issue was when
they started the whole alkaline
phases, the body was way
too acid because of--
>>REGINA: Because of our diet?
>>ROM: Because of our diet
and the processed foods
that people are eating.
But we tend to think
that more is better.
And it's not in the human body.
You just have to strike the
right kind of balance, right?
So you can be alkaline, and
you could eat alkaline foods.
Like lemon water is acidic,
but it's an alkaline.
It has an alkalizing effect.
>>REGINA: Yeah, no
one understands that.
Tell us why that is.
Do you know why?
No one's actually
explained it yet.
>>ROM: Yeah, it doesn't
really turn your body alkaline
directly, but citric acid
has an effect in the body
in such a way that it affects
the different enzymatic
processes in the body to
normalize the pH in the body.
I'll just leave it at that.
It's a very complex--
>>REGINA: Yeah, it is.
It's one that's not
well understood.
So, OK, go ahead.
>>ROM: So there are a lot
of other beneficial acids.
And people-- we need acids.
Our gut needs an acidic
environment to live.
Our gut cannot take an
alkaline environment.
>>REGINA: It can't digest
food properly, can it?
>>ROM: It can't
digest food properly.
And plus, our stomach is pH2!
We keep drinking alkaline water,
and you raise that pH even one,
to pH3, that's a
10 times increase
loss of hydrochloric acid.
>>REGINA: So then
it can't do its job?
>>ROM: It can't
do its job right.
So in the long term,
I don't believe
in a high alkaline
water consumption
for long-term health.
>>REGINA: It's interesting,
too, I noticed in the literature
on the various machines--
alkaline water machines--
is that it will say,
if you have food
poisoning, for example,
or if you have a cut on your
body, use the runoff water,
as it separates out
into the main faucet
with high alkalinity.
The dumping valve is very acidic
water that's separated out.
It'll say, keep that on hand.
Because that's what you use
for healing, whether it's
on a wound, or
whether it's if you
feel you have food
poisoning, a stomach flu--
drink some of that acid water.
So this explains why you
would drink that acid water.
>>ROM: Right, because it has--
>>REGINA: Because it's like
usually three point, right?
>>ROM: That's right.
It helps your gut to
renormalize itself.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ROM: Right, it adds
the acid into your belly.
>>REGINA: So now we get into
the notion of diet in general.
And again, this comes
up in a lot of shows.
Some people do
better with veganism.
better with Paleo.
That's mostly steeped
in vegetables.
I mean, the diet
philosophy's mostly
vegetables, and some
proteins, and some fats.
And we look at the
vegetable kingdom, which
tends to be alkaline, right?
>>ROM: Yes.
>>REGINA: And then we look
at the kingdom of eggs, meat,
and all these other things tend
to be heavily or more acidic.
So what is your view about the
various food intake, knowing
that it's highly
individual in terms
of feeding the proper
microbiomes in the body?
>>ROM: Got it.
So again, it's all a matter
of individual preference
and taste.
My feeling is that
whatever we can
do to be more in partnership
with nature and the earth
and more sustainable
is the thing to do.
The biological intelligence
that's in our gut
is all about
communing with nature.
It keeps us from being
divorced from nature.
And I think that our
divorce from nature
is a product of this new
artificial intelligence--
this new technology
information phenomenon
that we're experiencing,
where we're losing
that divorce from nature.
So we really need to build
up our microbiome in the gut
to amass this biological
information so we live
a limitless lifestyle,
so we get the most amount
of, what I call,
longevicans in our body.
And whatever way your body
can amass those longevicans
in a sustainable, earth-friendly
manner, I'm all for it.
>>REGINA: Right, and it
is highly individual,
and you know because the
proof is in the pudding.
The state of your
health will show you
that you're on the right path.
>>ROM: Right.
Now my wife is vegan--
not vegan, she's plant-based,
but I'm not plant-based.
And I try my hardest to
be plant-based as much
as possible, and I have
to eat meat now and then,
and not just--
I don't like to eat pork.
And I can't eat fish, because
I feel like a lot of the fish
is toxic.
So I end up eating chicken.
But I have to eat meat.
And my body just feels
better with meat.
And I know that I just feel
more strengthened with it.
>>REGINA: And this is a real
issue in a lot of families.
>>ROM: And I feel guilty.
>>REGINA: I'm in
the same situation.
My husband is a vegan.
And he's strong, and
he's mentally clear,
and just beautiful.
And after 20 years,
for me, I was
slipping so badly, that I had
to go back into also chicken
and free-range, grass-fed beef.
And I feel guilty.
So I tend not to do
it because I don't
want to cook it around him.
I don't want to subject him
to this lower consciousness
thinking.
This is how I am
projecting it on myself.
And yet at the same time, if
I don't do it for long enough,
I start feeling my health
start slipping again.
>>ROM: And exactly.
And previously, I
thought, oh, it's
just a matter of the microbes
creating these things
because they say
that the microbes are
the ones that crave the
foods that you want to eat.
>>REGINA: What do you find
it is true about that?
>>ROM: I don't know.
Personally, I try to get on
a plant-based diet and say,
maybe my microbes should shift.
But then, it doesn't happen.
Maybe I'm not being
disciplined enough.
But you were vegan for 20 years.
>>REGINA: I was
vegetarian for 20 years.
>>ROM: Vegetarian for 20 years.
And you found out that
something was missing.
I found this in
several other people.
They've been vegan, or
vegetarian, and plant-based,
and then they had to revert back
to eating some sort of animal
protein every once in a while,
just to get their bodies back
into balance.
So I know that somehow their
microbes are in their body.
They're not leaving, and
they're craving this food,
saying that, I need to make this
food to ferment it to give you
these fermented
metabolites to make my body
the healthiest, optimized for
longevity body in the world.
>>REGINA: Right, and I asked
you that question initially
because it is a more
acidic food group.
>>ROM: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so going
back into that, one thing
we talked about on
the phone in prep
for this was that
there haven't really
been any in-depth
studies on the alkalinity
in the human body and its
long-term effects, right?
And you're saying it's
causing detrimental effects
to the microbiome to go
tip over into alkalinity.
>>ROM: No, I wouldn't say--
I don't want to say that.
I don't want to say it's
causing detrimental effects
because there hasn't
been really any--
>>REGINA: There's no study?
OK.
>>ROM: I just think the
study is kind of moot.
It's like I don't--
I think the body is a
homeostatic mechanism.
It's going to do whatever it
takes to stay in pH balance.
And I don't think you should
be too much in alkalinity
or too much in acidity.
And obviously, I would want
to be more alkaline than acid.
It's proven.
It's a proven fact.
But you don't want
to just, I'll just
leave it-- that you don't
want to be too alkaline.
You just have to
balance yourself.
>>REGINA: OK, so now
let's look at the project
you're directly involved in, and
what you think the outcome is
going to be in this,
and how available might
this type of
testing, so to speak,
become for the public at large?
What are the
implications of that?
>>ROM: Well, the
project that I'm
involved in called the
Longevican Project is A,
to do these super
fermentation techniques.
And we're trying to create
nutritional supplements,
like in our toothpaste
and in these new prashas
that we're going to come out
with-- these new energy drinks.
>>REGINA: Oh, I want
to hear about that.
Tell me a little more.
>>ROM: The energy drinks?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ROM: Yeah, well, the
energy drinks are basically
energy for our mitochondria.
>>REGINA: Oh, god,
that sounds wonderful.
>>ROM: So the mitochondria
are actually microbes.
So I've been looking at them
from a microbial point of view.
I mean, we can have
another talk about why
I think the mitochondria
are really the human body.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ROM: And when they evolved,
they co-evolved with a human
being--
the eukaryotic organism
experience a monumental shift.
It was able to
take over the globe
and become the
dominant life force,
the eukaryotes on the earth.
And the eukaryotes that
spin out the mitochondria
became parasites.
All the parasites have very low
or actually no mitochondria,
like giardia has
no mitochondria.
So it depends on the host to
suck energy off of the host,
right?
And I would say like, parasitic
human beings maybe have
a mitochondrial dysfunction.
>>REGINA: Perhaps.
>>ROM: Because
they're low on energy.
And so these energy
drinks are filled with--
number one, they're
filled with oxygen.
They're hyperoxygenated drinks.
But they also are filled with
the right kind of mineral
content, and they have these--
what I call these longevicans
in there--
these small-chain fatty
acids, these polypeptides,
these lipopolysaccharides
that are solely there
to help the mitochondria
function better,
help the mitochondria
die off and regrow.
>>REGINA: Isn't that something
that's misunderstood?
That once mitochondria's
dead, it's dead?
You can't really
repopulate your body?
That's not true, is it?
>>ROM: That's not true at all.
Yeah, I think the
mitochondria are probably
the most misunderstood
organelle--
>>REGINA: OK, we can't wait
this long for another interview,
because that would be
months and months away.
Just give us a
couple hints-- what
are some of the things we can
do to, right now today, start
boosting our levels
of mitochondria?
>>ROM: Green
apples, for example.
>>REGINA: Green apples?
>>ROM: Right,
green apples have--
if you juice green
apples, number one,
it has a high level
of malic acid.
Anyone that deals with
the TCA or the Krebs cycle
knows that malic
acid gets shunted
into acetic acid, which
are known to boost
the function of mitochondria.
>>REGINA: That's a
simple thing right there.
>>ROM: Our drinks are filled
with that malic acid and forms
of haloacetic acid, but
also all these other signal
proteins that are there
to enhance the viability
of our mitochondria.
>>REGINA: Oh, this is exciting.
>>ROM: So that's one hack.
So all these really
simple bioacts--
there are coenzyme that--
and there are other compounds
that help the mitochondria.
There's this one
coenzyme called NAD.
>>REGINA: NAD, yeah.
>>ROM: And believe
it or not, there
are bacterial metabolites that
enhance the formation of NAD.
And you can get these
bacterial metabolites
through this super
fermentation product.
So again, we're putting that
into our probiotic water.
>>REGINA: I'm really
excited about this.
When's that go into production?
>>ROM: When's that
go into production?
Well, we got the water
in production now.
And this water has a
lot of oxygen in it.
Our water is
basically pure water,
and we crystallize it using
these crystals from deep down
in Antarctica.
There's this lake that these
Russians found in Antarctica
when they started drinking it.
All of a sudden, people
started to get better.
I'm not going to--
>>REGINA: Putin's
big on this stuff.
>>ROM: He is.
He actually drinks this
water, believe it or not.
And a lot of football
players in the United States
drink this type of
oxygenated water.
>>REGINA: Why shouldn't we have
the advantage Putin has, right?
He's always showing you his
body that looks good at 63 or 64
often.
>>ROM: And you know why?
Look at his body, you know?
>>REGINA: Yeah, he
looks like a young man.
>>ROM: You know why?
Is because he has
very low inflammation.
Like inflammation levels
are the number one thing
to take care of our body.
Then, we have to look at our
cardiovascular and immune
status.
And when you drink water
that's really high in oxygen,
they're finding out that
it deinflames your body.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ROM: Like we've had
just testimonials--
this is not a health claim--
but we've had testimonials
of people like over 50
that claim not to have to go
to the bathroom so many times
at night, just by
drinking this water
that we have with these stable
water clusters and high oxygen
levels of water.
So--
>>REGINA: For our
next discussion.
>>ROM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Compton,
we're out of time.
I just, as always, I absolutely
love chatting with you.
And I don't really
like doing things
that look like infomercials,
but the stuff you do
is in such integrity,
I really can't wait.
So I just have to say that.
Thanks again.
>>ROM: You're welcome.
>>REGINA: We'll have another
conversation on mitochondria
next time.
>>ROM: Yes, I'm excited.
>>REGINA: Me, too.
An absolutely delightful
experience for me
as always-- always enlightening.
If you haven't already viewed
my first video with Compton,
introducing the subject of
healthy microbes and bacteria,
you can find it in
the Gaia archives.
As for checking into his line
of healthy micro-based products,
you can go to
ascendedhealth.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]